# String Digester, Spring 2019
#### Kiki Lo, Antonio Martinez, Gaby Sibel, Zsofia Szegletes
#### February 22, 2019

## Abstract
The objective of String Digester for the Spring 2019 semester is to continue research on revamping a wastewater treatment system to eliminate problems associated with current trickling filters. To improve consistency in wastewater treatment, experiments will be conducted using metallic and plastic chains to optimize surface area. The long-term goal of this team is to create an efficient wastewater treatment system that will perform secondary and tertiary treatment on domestic wastewater. These tests will involve different chain types and materials, chain spacing, and biofilm growth to help define design parameters for the construction of a functioning string digester.

## Introduction
The String Digester sub-team was created in response to the remaining need for secondary and tertiary wastewater treatment after treatment from the Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactor. Looking to improve on the traditional industrial-scale trickling filter design, previous work identified an issue with the process: there is a substantial amount of unused space in almost all treatment units due to preferential flow of wastewater. The primary objective of this sub-team is to continue to develop a novel design for a highly efficient trickling filter with a minimized footprint. Following the conclusion from Fall 2018, that metal chains would be a viable trickling media due to their retention of water, the team decided to focus this semester's research on trying to determine what material and type of chain would work best in terms of water retention and biofilm growth and from there, determining the best matrix for these chains to be in to maximize water retention on chain media. With this work, the team will work towards assessing the feasibility of a modified trickling filter unit in future AguaClara treatment plants while striving to make significant technological improvements on industry-standard applications for the system.

Research dealing with trickling filter wastewater treatment was ubiquitous in the 1970's and 1980's, however, research involving chain media in this method of treatment is almost nonexistent along with a decline in general trickling filter wastewater treatment research in following decades. Research on secondary wastewater treatment, performed by trickling filters previously, shifted more towards processes higher in energy consumption. Because of AguaClara's mission and the regions a future wastewater plant would serve, trickling filters are a promising technology due to their low-energy requirements, and with work in reducing unused space in these plants, these treatment systems are ideal. Maintaining will be a priority in the team's future design. With modification, the trickling filter treatment system carries much potential to be implemented in areas of the world in which capital expenditure is a major barrier for employing traditional secondary wastewater treatment (aeration tanks).

## Previous Works
### Spring 2018
In Spring 2018, the Trickling Filter team spent a substantial amount of time doing research and gathering information on the operational difficulties, the kinetics, and typical design parameters of trickling filters. The team aimed to address many of the issues plant operators encounter with trickling filters, like clogging and ponding, lack of moisture in parts of the filter, and general inefficiency of the filter. The two main areas for improvement the team identified were the filter media itself and the distribution system ([Spring 2018 Final Report](https://github.com/AguaClara/String-Digester/blob/master/Spring%20'18/TricklingFilter_Final_Report.md)).



The team fabricated a bench top model for flow mapping and conducted several rounds of tests to determine the distribution of flow in trickling filters with small rock and marble media. From these experiments, the team noticed that there were significant portions of the media that never got wet and thus concluded that a substantial volume of the trickling filter was unused due to preferential flow. From these tests the team also showed that a uniform packing material is superior to an irregularly shaped material. In an effort to both maximize the surface area to volume ratio and to minimize the footprint of the system by not wasting space, the team shifted focus towards strings as a possible filter media. This concept led the team to start with very preliminary testing of a system that was essentially an overflowing basin with strings submerged at the top, inside the basin, and draped over the sides to guide water down to a collection bucket below. (See Figure 2 in section 1.2.2 in [Fall 2018 Final Report](https://github.com/AguaClara/String-Digester/blob/master/Fall%20'18/Final_Report_stringdigester.md) for an example of  experimental set-up similar to those conducted in Spring 2018.) In these initial tests, the team members observed that the water did in fact follow the along strings when it overflowed. From these observations, the String Digester team began to design more rigorous tests on the concept and planned to investigate whether using strings in a wastewater treatment system is truly viable.

### Fall 2018
In Fall 2018, the team continued experimentation with the overflowing basin from the previous semester. Nylon, polypropylene, and a stainless steel wire and cable were first tested. While the plastics were non-biodegradable, the stainless steel may be susceptible to corrosion. All of the proceeding materials did not perform well on the basin set-up as the water did not follow the strands due to their hydrophobicity.


at first experienced difficulties finding a material for the strings that is both non-biodegradable and will allow the wastewater to stay on the string as it falls over the side of the basin instead of coming off and just falling freely. Experimentation showed that the first set of polymer-based string options will not work as a filter media unless somehow altered to make them hydrophilic. The stainless steel based strings show more potential but still seem to require some modifications to the design before they will work with any consistency. The foams and chains show promise as potential materials for a string digester. These materials were able to retain water as it trickled down. The blue foam worked exceptionally well as it absorbed water. The initial testing done on these materials suggests they could work in the proposed system and make the string digester technology possible.

Creating a rapid but efficient string digester would be impactful for the future of AguaClara's involvement in wastewater treatment. String digesters have the potential to greatly decrease the wastewater processing time and also decrease the organic solutes in the effluent. By maximizing potential surface area for the microbes to grow on using strings and sponges, thereby allowing for more microbial digestion of the water, some traditional trickling filter problems would be solved or minimized. Effluent from the UASB will require further treatment and the team believes that a string digester could provide the necessary treatment with minimal energy requirements.


## Literature Review
### Trickling Filters
The filter media in a conventional trickling filter is usually a material such as rocks, gravel, shredded PVC bottles, or special pre-formed plastic filter media. Because all these materials are not regularly shaped and wastewater is not distributed exactly equally across the top of the media, the water follows the paths of least resistance and preferential flow occurs. Thus, there is wasted space in the filter that remains dry and unused. This leads to a less efficient treatment of organic matter than if all of the space in the filter were utilized. In their paper, Spuhler recommends using specially manufactured plastic media, like corrugated plastic sheets or even hollow plastic cylinders, to optimize surface area for biofilm formation & allow for free movement of air [(Spuhler 2018).](https://www.sswm.info/node/8215)

In addition to non-homogenous distribution of wastewater throughout the filter, there is significant documentation of other problems plant operators experience when dealing with trickling filters. Ali and co-authors state that one major problem is clogging and ponding occurring within the filter media due to high biomass sloughing rate. In the context of a trickling filter, sloughing refers to when a layer of the microbial growth loses the ability to stay attached and is shed from the filter media and washed away by water flow. If the layer of biofilm is not maintained at a desired thickness, treatment performance will decrease. Clogging results in a decreased efficiency of treatment and if it is not addressed, the quality of the effluent will suffer. Current solutions include flashing with low doses of chlorine to remove deposited solids and kill excess biomass or periodic flooding [(Ali et al. 2017)](http://www.pjoes.com/pdf/26.6/Pol.J.Environ.Stud.Vol.26.No.6.2431-2444.pdf). The team aims avoid the problem altogether by using strings and not having a media that can clog up. It is still an important factor to consider in the design because any small slots or holes that the wastewater travels through in the system will likely clog up with biofilm growth.

Ali also states that the aforementioned sloughing and clogging is often caused by uneven hydraulic loading rates (HLR). Uneven HLR is caused by clogging of the distribution arm and an uneven distribution of influent. Therefore, proper distribution of wastewater onto the filter media is crucial for optimizing efficiency of treatment. The most common method of influent distribution is rotating distributors. Rotating distributors consist of moving parts that require more maintenance and may be a burden in a plant to operators. Additionally, this system will not serve the string-focused design.

The less common method of distribution, the fixed distribution system, utilizes lateral and main distribution pipes, which are placed just above the medium and spaced to give uniform distribution of water. The pipes generally have nozzles with a circular hole and a deflector. This method is commonly used with intermittent dosing, meaning flow from the system varies; it starts at a maximum and lowers as the tank empties. Currently, fixed distribution systems are mostly used in deep filter and biotowers (i.e. very tall filters). Since this method is non-rotating, it may be more applicable for the proposed use of a string media. However, Sperling and colleagues showed that both the fixed and rotating distribution systems have an inconsistent hydraulic load of the influent [(Sperling 2007)](https://www.iwapublishing.com/sites/default/files/ebooks/9781780402123.pdf). Therefore, the distribution system is another area where there is huge potential for the team to increase the productivity of trickling filters.


Although there are multiple problems with trickling filters, one main advantage of trickling filters is that they have a relatively low residence time. This is a consideration which the team should plan to maintain in future designs. Hinton and Stensel measured residence time per unit length of between 30 and 40 sec/m with dye tests. Their predicted residence times, calculated from laminar flow theory, were closer to about 15 sec/m. The authors attributed this discretion to "dye sorption and desorption by the biofilm." In either case, the residence time for a 5 meter deep trickling filter would be well under 5 minutes [(Hinton and Stensel 1991)](https://ac.els-cdn.com/0043135491901179/1-s2.0-0043135491901179-main.pdf?_tid=e8d2db22-8e0f-4d3c-a421-352ef74e6f5e&acdnat=1540500088_4808114af12660c061fbd139ac0fbd33). This short treatment time makes trickling filters an appealing wastewater treatment option if problems such as uneven HLR and clogging can be minimized.


### Biofilm
A component of the string digester that is crucial to its success is the growth of biofilm on the chains. "A biofilm is an assemblage of microbial cells that is irreversibly associated (not removed by gentle rinsing) with a surface and enclosed in a matrix of primarily polysaccharide material." [(Donlan 2002).](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2732559/) Biofilm attachment is a complex process regulated by diverse characteristics of the growth medium, substratum, and cell surface. Biofilm on trickling filters are composed of a variety of organisms and are typically enclosed in a polysaccharide. The biofilm matrix may also contain mineral crystals, corrosion particles, and clay or silt particles. Biofilms in wastewater systems are often highly complex [(Donlan 2002).](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2732559/)

Some testing has been done of the growth of biofilm in different surfaces. One study compared growth on glossy electro-polished, bright annealed stainless steel to matte stainless steel and to PVC. The paper notes that stainless steel is hydrophilic and PVC is hydrophobic. In the last 45 days of the 167 day experiment, the matte steel had about 1.44 times more microorganisms than the electro-polished steel, and there was no significant difference between the PVC and polished steel. In discussion of why this occurs, Pedersen cites two reasons: "detachment due to shear forces from the flow will be reduced on the rougher surface since cells can be shielded from the bulk flow and more substratum surface area may be available for the biofilm" [(Pedersen 1990).](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2732559/)


In another experiment, three different types of plastic often used in pipe production were investigated for biofilm formation. These materials were PVC, PEX, and HDPE. After two years of system operation, which included weekly pipeline flushing, biofilm analyses were taken. It was found that the PEX pipe had the highest number of bacteria growing (1.15*10<sup>3</sup> $\frac{CFU}{cm^2}$; CFU: colony-forming unit), HDPE pipes had two times less the amount of bacteria (451 $\frac{CFU}{cm^2}$), and PVC surfaces had a significantly lower bacteria count (193 $\frac{CFU}{cm^2}$). However, the number of microorganisms found in the pipes was not related to the number of mineral deposits found, as HDPE pipes had the thickest biofilms with bacteria attached to mineral deposits or immersed in exopolymers. Bacteria did not form large aggregates on PEX surfaces, and PVC biofilm was only made of single cells and did not have any mineral deposits. It was concluded that the ranking of susceptibility to biofilm growth and colonization was HDPE, PEX, and PVC respectively. [(A. Rożej et al., 2015)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4282696/)


Studies have also been conducted about the bacteria that produce the biofilm on the stainless steel. Many of these studies involve curli-producing bacteria. Curli fibers "are the major proteinaceous component of a complex extracellular matrix produced by many Enterobacteriaceae" and "are involved in adhesion to surfaces, cell aggregation, and biofilm formation" [(Barnhart and Chapman).](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2838481/) One such study focused on *Escherichia coli* O157:H7 bacteria with 6 individual strains, three of which produced curli and three which did not. The study found that the gene for curli production did not affect the attachment of the bacteria to the stainless steel, but it did affect the formation of biofilms. Only the curli producing strains were able to form biofilms [(Ryu et al. 2004).](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1472-765X.2004.01591.x) However, since *E. coli* are fairly common in wastewater, it is probable for biofilm to be able to grow on the stainless steel chains as long as some kind of bacteria with the curli-producing gene is present in the wastewater. So assuming that the bacteria will most likely be present, once the biofilm is built up on each of the chains the main issue then becomes preventing accumulated biofilm falling off one chain and then dragging it off other chains as well in a domino effect.

## Bibliography
Ali et al. (2017). "Identification and Elucidation of the Designing and Operational Issues of Trickling Filter Systems for Wastewater Treatment." *Polish Journal of Environmental Studies.* 26(6), 2431-2444.

Barnhart, M. M., & Chapman, M. R. (2006). *Curli Biogenesis and Function.* Annual Review of Microbiology, 60(1), 131-147.

Donlan, Rodney. (2002). "Biofilms: Microbial Life on Surfaces." *Emerging Infectious Diseases.* Sept. 2002.

Hinton, Steven. David, Stensel. (1991). "Experimental observation of trickling filter hydraulics." *Water Research.* (pp. 1389-139).

Onodera et al. (2014). "Development of a sixth-generation down-flow hanging sponge (DHS) reactor using rigid sponge media for post-treatment of UASB treating municipal sewage." *Bioresource Technology.* 152, 93-100.

Pedersen, Karsten. (1990). "Biofilm development on stainless steel and PCV surfaces in drinking water" *Water Research.* (pp. 239-243).

Rozej et al. (2015). "Structure and microbial diversity of biofilms on different pipe materials of a model drinking water distribution systems." *World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology* 31: 37-47.

Ryu, J., Kim, H., Frank, J., & Beuchat, L. (2004). *Attachment and biofilm formation on stainless steel by Escherichia coli O157:H7 as affected by curli production.* Letters in Applied Microbiology, 39(4), 359-362.

Sperling, Marcos von (2007). *Activated Sludge and Aerobic Biofilm Reactors.* (pp. 271-283) London: IWA Publishing.

Spuhler, Dorothee; Eawag (Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology). *Trickling Filter.*

Tandukar et al. (2005). "A low-cost municipal sewage treatment system with a combination of UASB and the "fourth-generation" downflow hanging sponge reactors." *Water Science Technology.* 52(1-2): 323-329.
